---
title: Design sprints at Firefly
date: 2017-02-01
images:
  -
    image: the-squad.jpg
    caption: The communications squad works on solutions for a more flexible navigation in Firefly
    set: squad
  -
    image: voting.jpg
    caption: A squad member votes on their parts of the solution they particularly like.
    set: voting
---

Yesterday, we ran our first design sprint. Despite some dire warnings against running a one day sprint, we did it anyway. For this particular well defined problem it worked, but only just. This article is about what happened and our plans for design sprints in the future.

(figure set:squad)

## What is a design sprint?

The design sprint was developed by Jake Knapp from [Google Ventures](http://www.gv.com/sprint/). In its full form, its a five day process for answering business questions through design. Its a way to fail early meaning you deliver something that really works  first time.

Implicit in the process is the requirement to gather opinions from all areas of the business, not just the design team. Typically you might involve those with customer contact, for example the support or design teams. You may also invite an expert from finance and marketing as well as members from the tech and design teams.

A rough plan for the week might look like this:

| Day | Outline |
| ----- | ----- |
| Monday | Understanding the challenge and decide what problem you’re trying to solve |
| Tuesday | A number of different sketching activities to fully explore potential solutions |
| Wednesday | The whole team presents and votes on solutions from Tuesday. The decider makes the final decision which one(s) should be turned into a storyboard / wireframe. |
| Thursday | Creating a prototype of your solution you can test with users. |
| Friday | Testing your prototype with five users and gathering feedback.


## What’s the benefit for Firefly?

We’ve been getting excited about design sprints for a while. The mantra of “fail early” is especially useful as it helps us to stay agile in a fast-paced market place.

We’ve always listened closely to what teachers, students and parents want, but understanding exactly what they’ll find genuinely useful is rather more difficult.

A process like design sprints helps us get our ideas in-front of customers at the earliest possible opportunity, and find out if what we *think* they want is actually useful, without going through the long process of design, build and QA first.

## Our experience

We already had a very well defined problem, namely how to give schools greater flexibility in their Firefly navigation. In the sprint we’d set out to design both the updated navigation and the administration interface that would allow site administrators to customise the menu.

I ran the day (the “facilitator”), Viviana, our product manager, was the “decider” and the Communications squad (a cross-discipline team who would be building the feature) were our sketching team.

We used some of the sprint ideas from the Tuesday and Wednesday. Our plan looked like this:

### Introduction

As the facilitator, I introduced the problem, and went over the plan for the day. We also provided everyone with a list of “Jobs to be done” that described a user and what they wanted to achieve, for example:

> When organising the school's Firefly pages, I want to be able to divide pages into highly visible sections, so I can make it easier to find content that is relevant for students, parents and teachers and show off the content we have.

### Remix & improve

Before the workshop, we’d asked everyone to look for examples of other sets of data organised well. The obvious thing being other navigation that worked well, but we didn’t limit people to this.

We then asked everyone to give a 3 minute “lightening presentation” on their chosen example. I made sketch notes on a whiteboard as they did this.

### Early ideas

The team was then asked to spend some time looking around the room at the examples we’d shared and the jobs list and start making low fidelity sketches of initial ideas. 

### Crazy 8’s

This was my favourite bit! Everyone was told to fold a piece of A4 three times to create 8 squares. They then had 1 minute per square to iterate on their best ideas from the ideas they’d come-up with so far.

### Your solution

Everyone was then asked to create a set of storyboards, one that describe the navigation itself, and another that detailed the administration of the menu. It was recommend they use 3 post-it notes per storyboard, this would give just enough detail to describe the user-journey with enough detail as to be easily understood.

### Silent heat-mapping

Once done, we stuck our solution sketches up on the wall. The team were then each given 10 vote stickers, with which they could vote for their favourite features from the sketches. This was done in silence, without any explination from the sketch’s creator about their thought process. This was designed to prevent unequal swaying of opinion by those better at arguing their case than others.

### Speed critique

Once everyone had voted, we went into a speed critique round. As the facilitator, I attempted to explain what I understood from each of the sketches in 3 minuets or less. People we’re encouraged to shout out questions, which were then written on post-it notes and stuck to the sketch. It was only when I was done that the sketch’s creator could explain their thought process.

### Straw poll

It was voting time again. Everyone was given two final votes, one for the navigation another for the admin. They then voted for their favourite overall sketch, and explained why.

### Super-vote!

Now it was the deciders tern. In consultation with the rest of the team, Viv cherry-picked the best ideas from the day.

### Divide & conquer

Finally we split into two small teams, and drew the final paper prototypes (navigation and admin) based on the choices Viv had made in the previous round. These will be used as the basis for the design solution.

## What we learned

## What next?