---
title: Improving our design tooling
date: 2017-03-27
tags:
    - Leading Design
    - Sketch
    - Firefly
    - Pattern Libraries
---
Remember when you first considered a career in design? Maybe you went off to university, or maybe you took a more vocational route into a design job. However it happened, I’m sure, like me, you had an idealised view of what a job in design would be.

The reality is that a job in design probably isn’t everything you’d hoped. Sure there is creativity, but there’s an awful lot of day-to-day grunt work than you’d bargained for.

Creating a constant user experience means that once you’ve designed a system that the user will use to interact with your product, you shouldn’t deviate too far from this, or risk the user getting lost or confused. However, this can lead to rather a lot of cut and paste on the part of the designer who has to design each screen and state.

This is certainly true for our visual designers at Firefly. We ask a lot of them, and they deliver consistently. So it’s only right we work hard to provide the right tools to automate as much of the grunt-work as possible. 

## Making the switch to Sketch
Recently we’ve been making _the big switch_, from Adobe Illustrator to [Sketch](https://www.sketchapp.com/). This has given us the opportunity to reevaluate our design pattern library, as we have had to rebuild it in Sketch.

We had several problems with the Illustrator
based pattern library that we wanted to fix, namely:

* Our design team did an amazing job, but there was **no plan** of what we wanted to build before we started building it. Ergo, we ended up with a confusing bunch of documents containing a mix of interface elements.
* There was no reliable way of telling which components were out of date.
* There were some repeated elements, that were subtly different from one another, and no way to tell which on to use in a new design.
* There was little parity between the design patterns and the front-end pattern library. Each time a new screen was implemented, design patterns had to be translated into front-end patterns. Most of this knowledge lived only inside developers heads. This was bad.

## This time we had a plan


## How Sketch symbols help us stay sane


## A swing, and a miss
Imagine a utopia where you can 

