---
title: Creating a pattern library in Sketch
date: 2017-04-20
tags:
    - pattern libraries
    - leading design
    - sketchapp
    - abstractapp
    - firefly
images:
  -
    image: map.png
    caption: We created a map of all the existing patterns and their states and modifiers 
    set: map
  -
    image: categorising-symbols.png
    caption: An example of how were using layout and labels to categorise symbols in Sketch
    set: categorising
  -
    image: symbols-dropdown.png
    caption: Using slash notation in symbols names to create easily navigable folders within Sketch
    set: dropdown
  -
    image: button-anatomy.png
    set: button-anatomy
  -
    image: using-a-symbol.png
    caption: Using symbol overrides to change the appearance of the button pattern.
    set: using-a-symbol
---

I don’t think its hyperbole to say that there’s a revolution happening in the design of digital products.  Designers have long had the idea of designing interfaces from a kit of pre-built parts, but never really had the tools to do this effectively. Sketch is such a tool.

At Firefly, we’ve recently made the transition to Sketch specifically because of the power of symbols. These have enabled us to build our pattern library in a way that helps us to do some extremely rapid prototyping and create consistent experiences for our users.

Our Front-End and iOS teams already have pattern libraries, so our dream was to create a design pattern library that would contain the same elements. This would mean that we’d all be working from the same list of patterns, rather than adding another translation step into implementation.

## Structure

We studied the structure of the existing pattern libraries and created a map that included all patterns, their modifiers and states. This gave us the structure for our patterns, and a place to start from when translating programatic patterns into something that would be useable in Sketch. 

In simple terms, our pattern library is a Sketch file containing, as symbols, all the elements in the Firefly interface. We subdivide  these into separate files, one for each platform: Web, iOS and Android.

In each of the files, we’ve categorised our symbols into areas. This helps massively with your mental model when browsing the symbols page. This also allows us to print a visual style-guide of all our patterns.

(figure set:categorising,class:pull-both)

## Symbols

Sketch supports symbol nesting and overrides. This makes symbols extremely powerful. This allows you to create a pattern element by combining symbols together. 

However, organisation is everything. If you don’t follow a systematic approach to creating patterns, they’re extremely difficult to use in the wild. We know from experience that confusion arises about which symbols are patterns, and which are simply the building blocks of patterns. Let me explain...

### Parts and Patterns

(figure set:button-anatomy,class:pull-right)

A pattern is made up of either parts or other symbols. Each part is a symbol. A Button, for example, is made up of two parts *Background* and *Label*, and another pattern *Icon*. We use [slash notation](https://www.sketchapp.com/learn/documentation/symbols/organizing-symbols/) to organise parts and patterns under one namespace.

(figure set:dropdown,class:pull-both)

Organising our symbols this way makes it easy when using a pattern. It’s immediately obvious from the list of symbols which is a pattern that’s intended for use, and which are just the building blocks of patterns.

### Using Patterns in the wild

When designing a new feature, we’ll start out with a blank sketch file. Let’s say, for example, that we wanted a very simple interface that required two buttons: OK and Cancel. OK needs to be a cancel type with a tick icon, and Cancel needs to be a default type with a cross icon.

In our pattern library file, we have a page called _scratch_ where we can set up a pattern ready to be copied into another file. We select the `Button > Patterns > Button with Icon Left` symbol from the list and drop it into our scratch page. We can then use the symbol overrides to change it’s Background, Icon and Label as required. We can also override the text.

(figure set:using-a-symbol,class:pull-both)

Once the pattern is set up, we can then copy this into the new document. This only copies the parts required for this instance of the pattern. So trying to change the symbol overrides in the new file won’t work until you copy over all variations of a pattern. 

---

## Using the pattern library with a team

As brilliant as Sketch symbols are, they don’t yet fully support our ideal workflow. When we set out to create our pattern library, we had a set of requirements, these were:

1. Symbols are stored in a central location that is accessible by the whole team
2. Symbols are linked across files, updating a symbol in any file updates it everywhere
3. Editing clashes are handled in a nice way
4. Symbols can be organised into categories

### What we’re currently doing

Initially we experimented with [Craft](https://www.invisionapp.com/craft) from inVision. It’s library functionality would allow us to store symbols in a central location, share them across the team. Most excitingly of all, symbols would be linked across files, meaning we could ensure we were always using the latest version in our designs. 

Unfortunately, when it came to handling editing clashes, Craft did less well. We lost an entire week of work due to our library file becoming corrupted. We were told that this was a known issue, and the file was unrecoverable. We decided not to entrust our entire pattern library to Craft, there was no way we could risk that happening again.

We switched to using Sketch files themselves to contain our patterns. A downside to this solution was that editing clashes weren’t handled, at all. Rather, whoever saved the file last would overwrite work of anyone else. Thankfully, [Abstract](https://abstractapp.com/) came to our rescue. 

The team has been using Abstract for version management of Sketch files for the last few weeks, and what a difference it’s made! Once you have the git mental modal in your head, Abstract’s workflow makes a lot of sense. We can now branch off the mater pattern library document, make our changes, and merge back. Clashes are handled visually, giving you the choice of which symbol definition to keep. 

We now have three out of four of our original requirements. We’re almost there! But what about linking symbols across files? 

## A native solution?

I’d argue that level of complexity represented by shared symbols in Sketch requires a native solution. Plugins, like Craft, will only ever be a poly-fill at best.

Looking at the features that Bohemian have added to Sketch over the last few versions, I strongly suspect that they’re already working on some sort of shared symbols. It’s a natural fit for them, they already have the cloud infrastructure with Sketch Cloud and with their new open JSON formatted files, it seems like this might be the next logical step. 


